There is no doubt that we’re living
in “critical times hard to deal with,”
just as the apostle Paul prophesied
under inspiration in 2 Timothy chapter 3.
Many times, we’ve read Matthew chapter 24,
Mark chapter 13, Luke chapter 21,
and Revelation chapter 6.
But who would ever have known
how deeply a pandemic,
so-called natural disasters,
violence, and unrest
would affect us economically,
physically, and even emotionally?
Some of you dear friends
face unimaginable hardships.
Many have experienced loss of loved ones,
imprisonment, physical abuse,
sickness, financial problems,
and sometimes a number of these
or other circumstances all at the same time.
You dear brothers and sisters
are in our prayers.
With this in mind, the theme for our program
is “In Difficult Times,
Jehovah Always Comforts.”
A scripture that’s become familiar
to Jehovah’s people
is 2 Corinthians 1:3, 4:
“Praised be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ,
“the Father of tender mercies
“and the God of all comfort,
“who comforts us in all our trials
“so that we may be able to comfort others
“in any sort of trial with the comfort
that we receive from God.”
The Study Bible  says this
regarding the expression
“the Father of tender mercies”:
“The Greek noun
rendered ‘tender mercies’ . . .
“is here used to describe a feeling
of compassion,
“or pity, for others.
“God is called the Father,
or the Source, of tender mercies
“because compassion emanates
from him and is part of his nature.
“Such tender feelings move him
“to act mercifully in behalf
of his faithful servants
who are suffering tribulation.”
Regarding the phrase,
“the God of all comfort,”
it continues: “The Greek noun . . .
here rendered ‘comfort,’
“literally means ‘a calling to one’s side.’
“It conveys the idea
of standing next to a person,
“helping or encouraging him
“when he is undergoing trials
or feeling sad. . . .
“God uses his powerful active force
“to give comfort and help in situations
that from a human viewpoint seem hopeless.”
Think about what that means.
Jehovah wants us to know
that whatever we face,
he is by our side, helping us
when we’re undergoing any sort of trial.
No, he did not promise
that he’d remove our trials.
Rather, he eases our misery, or grief,
whenever we undergo difficulties.
What a beautiful word picture
of God standing next to us,
especially when things seem hopeless!
We invite you to do a personal study project.
Using the publication
Research Guide for Jehovah’s Witnesses
or the Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY™,
do a word search on “comfort.”
You will be drawn even closer to Jehovah
and appreciate his unmatched desire
and ability to comfort.
Jehovah also inspired Paul to show
how he would stand by us to comfort us.
Notice Romans 15:4:
“For all the things
that were written beforehand
“were written for our instruction,
“so that through our endurance
“and through the comfort from the Scriptures
we might have hope.”
“Comfort from the Scriptures”
—time limits us from going
into all of the ways
that the Bible does this.
But let’s take some examples.
A scripture that Jehovah’s people
have often meditated on in recent times
is found in Jeremiah chapter 29.
When Jehovah inspired Jeremiah
to convey his message to the Jews,
they had been taken from Jerusalem
and were captives in Babylon.
They were downhearted.
But even while in captivity,
Jehovah provided a comforting message.
Notice his words
at Jeremiah 29:10:
“When 70 years at Babylon are fulfilled,
I will turn my attention to you.”
God told these Jewish exiles
that they would remain
in captivity for a long time.
Then he made it clear to them
that he had a peaceful future in mind.
The latter part of that verse says:
“And I will make good my promise
by bringing you back to this place.”
In verse 11, he says:
“‘I well know the thoughts
“that I am thinking toward you,’
“declares Jehovah, ‘thoughts of peace,
“‘and not of calamity,
to give you a future and a hope.’”
God did make good
on his promise to those Israelites.
He let them know
that their future was to be a bright one.
Regarding Jeremiah 29:11,
one commentary states:
“It is difficult to find
a more wonderful promise
“anywhere in Scripture
that expresses the tender compassion
“of Yahweh [Jehovah]
“toward these exiles
and setting before them, at last,
a real reason for optimism and expectation.”
Jehovah’s promise strengthened men
such as Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel.
Jehovah reassured the Jews
by repeating his promise
at Jeremiah 31:17:
“And there is a hope for your future . . .
Your sons will return
to their own territory.”
Sure enough, just as Jehovah foretold,
Babylon was conquered
by the Persian King Cyrus,
who allowed the exiled Jews
to return to their homeland.
After 70 years of captivity,
they were back in Jerusalem.
Jehovah ‘made good on his promise.’
What does that have to do with us today?
The fulfilled promises of Jehovah assure us
that his promises to us will come true
in spite of surrounding circumstances.
As he said: “I will make good my promise.”
How comforting to know that!
But we know that the greatest expression
of Jehovah’s comfort
is his only-begotten Son, Jesus.
During his time on earth,
he gave people hope.
Jesus engaged in a marvelous ministry
—healing the sick, performing powerful works
and, most important,
teaching people about God’s Kingdom.
However, the greatest expression
of hope to us humans
is Jesus’ ransom sacrifice.
Through his inspired Word,
we can see that Jehovah assures us
that he not only understands what we face
but also desires
to console and strengthen us.
Our loving heavenly Father
especially watches over all
who endeavor to do his will.
But in all of his mercy,
he also draws humble people
who may not yet know him.
How many of us were in dire straits
only to be introduced to the truth
and to get to know Jehovah at the right time?
That was no coincidence.
That’s a consequence of Jehovah’s love
and his desire to give people comfort
through the hope he provides.
Dear brothers and sisters,
as we get closer to the great tribulation,
we will face more distressing circumstances.
And during the great tribulation,
our trust in Jehovah must be solid.
We need to be sensitive
and receptive to the ways
in which he consoles and strengthens us.
We need to keep in mind what Paul says
at 2 Corinthians 1:4,
perhaps even memorizing it.
Jehovah is a God
“who comforts us in all our trials.”
Some time ago,
we interviewed two longtime members
of the United States Bethel family:
Brother Gerald Grizzle,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
and Brother Sam Roberson.
These two brothers served
as traveling overseers
for many years prior to coming to Bethel.
Brother Grizzle has served
at Bethel since 1978,
and Brother Roberson
has served here for nearly 20 years.
They’ve been assigned
by the Governing Body
to assist them in shepherding
the United States Bethel family.
‘Shepherding the Bethel family?’ you may ask.
‘After all, Bethelites
don’t have any distressing trials!’
Listen to what our dear brothers have to say.
Brother Grizzle,
what are some of the challenges
that members of the Bethel family face?
The worldwide Bethel family
is a representation of the brotherhood.
By that I mean that
just as 1 Peter 5:9 says,
they face ‘the same kind of sufferings
‘being experienced by the entire association
of our brothers in the world.’
Some deal with serious health problems,
but they continue to serve.
Others
have concerns over aging parents,
and some have to give up
their beloved Bethel service.
Still others contend
with bouts of depression.
But the spirit
of these dear brothers and sisters
impels them to have the determination
not to allow these challenges
to dominate them.
Rather, their faith in Jehovah
strengthens their resolve
to focus on their assignments.
Thank you for that insight,
Brother Grizzle.
Brother Roberson, how have you been able
to comfort such ones?
When we find out a Bethelite
is going through a tragedy,
there are four things that we do.
Number one, we pray for them
and develop specific spiritual points
according to their needs.
And that’s before we make the call.
Number two, when we actually make the call,
we really listen.
And I don’t mean
we just listen with our ears.
We try to listen with our hearts.
We try to feel what they feel.
We try to have compassion.
Number three, when we use God’s Word
to remind them
they’re not facing their crisis alone,
this is very effective.
As an example,
we called on a brother recently
who was going through a great trial,
and we shared, among other things,
Exodus 3:7, 12.
Let’s take a look at that:
“I have certainly seen the affliction
“of my people who are in Egypt,
“and I have heard their outcry
because of those who force them to work.”
And note the ending point here
—it’s very beautiful.
Jehovah doesn’t say,
‘I know how my people feel’;
he says: “I well  know
the pains [of my people].”
And then in giving assurance
dealing with Moses
fearing to go before Pharaoh,
in verse 12, just the A  part:
“To this he said:
‘I will prove to be with you.’”
It’s just a few words but so powerful,
where Jehovah is guaranteeing
that he’s going to give them undeniable proof
that he’s backing them up
and never moving away from them one inch.
And this gives us comfort.
Now, number four,
before we conclude the call,
we have an ending prayer with them.
And we use their names,
and this is very comforting
since we’re calling on Jehovah,
the Great Shepherd.
At 1 Thessalonians 5:14,
Paul says: “We urge you, brothers, to . . .
“speak consolingly to those
who are depressed,
[to] support the weak,
be patient toward all.”
And this is exactly what we’re trying to do.
Thanks for sharing those thoughts
—very interesting.
Brothers Grizzle and Roberson:
How has comforting others affected you?
Brother Grizzle first, please.
During these challenging times,
I sense Jehovah’s love for his people.
Over the years,
I have seen and experienced his care
when facing difficult times.
Some years ago,
I lost my mother, my brother,
and my father in death all within a year.
And in 2017,
I lost my dear wife, Bonnie,
after we had served Jehovah together
for nearly 65 years.
But with much prayer,
research, and love of the friends,
Jehovah has comforted me.
And now, thankfully,
I have been able
to offer encouragement to others.
Very touching, Brother Grizzle,
thank you.
Brother Roberson,
how has comforting others
affected you?
One of the most memorable challenges
was while my wife, Linda, and I
were in the circuit work
several years ago.
I lost my voice.
I had to have surgery on my vocal cords,
and for six weeks, I could not talk.
For a circuit overseer,
that’s like being a bird without its wings.
I wrote more notes in that six weeks
than I had written in my whole life!
But in spite of that
and along with other situations and tragedies
that we faced similar to Gerald’s,
Jehovah has seen us through them all.
And let me say, it’s been a real pleasure
to share Jehovah’s comfort with so many.
And as we do,
we see the Governing Body’s interest
in all of Jehovah’s people,
including those with added responsibility.
They truly reflect Jehovah’s feelings
as “the God of all comfort.”
Well, thank you, brothers.
We really appreciate your comments.
And more than the shepherding that you do
is the example that you have set
in enduring trials,
in experiencing Jehovah’s comfort,
and in comforting others.
Thank you so much.
The Governing Body has instituted
similar shepherding arrangements
in branch offices around the world.
Now we want to talk
to some of you in our audience.
Because of stresses, disappointments,
and hurt feelings caused by fellow believers,
some have strayed
from Jehovah’s organization.
Others may have been removed
from the congregation
but now would like to return.
To you we say:
“Allow Jehovah to comfort and strengthen you.
He wants you to draw close to him,
and he will help you.”
James 4:8 says:
“Draw close to God,
and he will draw close to you.”
Jehovah has great care for such ones.
Let’s read what he says
at Ezekiel 34:16:
“The stray I will bring back,
“the injured I will bandage,
and the weak I will strengthen.”
Some who have recovered have said
that one of the most
difficult things for them to do
was to cross the threshold
of the Kingdom Hall.
But remember, it’s Jehovah who bandages you,
his sheep, helping you to heal.
In the same chapter, in verse 12, he says:
“I will care for my sheep . . .
“I will rescue them from all the places
where they were scattered.”
In imitation of that love,
the faithful slave says,
“We view you as lost sheep,
not a lost cause.”
To all we say,
“No matter what you face, remember:
“In difficult times,
Jehovah always comforts.”